[FLINK-16975][documentation] Add docs for FileSystem connector (#12283)
apache/flink: docs/dev/table/connectors/filesystem.md

> ---

Reviewer: please put the file in section 《Table API Connectors》 rather than 《DataStream Connectors》

Reviewer: Please also add a filesystem.zh.md

  -- reduce the number of file for filesystem sink but may lead data skew, the default value is disabled.
  'sink.shuffle-by-partition.enable' = '...',
  ...
)
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Make sure to include [Flink File System specific dependencies]({{ site.baseurl }}/ops/filesystems/index.html).

<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> File system sources for streaming is still under development. In the future, the community will add support for common streaming use cases, i.e., partition and directory monitoring.

## Partition Files

Flink's file system partition support uses the standard hive format. However, it does not require partitions to be pre-registered with a table catalog. Partitions are discovered and inferred based on directory structure. For example, a table partitioned based on the directory below would be inferred to contain `datetime` and `hour` partitions.

```
path
└── datetime=2019-08-25
    └── hour=11
        ├── part-0.parquet
        ├── part-1.parquet
    └── hour=12
        ├── part-0.parquet
└── datetime=2019-08-26
    └── hour=6
        ├── part-0.parquet
```

> The file system table supports both partition inserting and overwrite inserting. See [INSERT Statement]({{ site.baseurl }}/table/sql/insert.html). When you insert overwrite to a partitioned table, only the corresponding partition will be overwritten, not the entire table.

Reviewer: please check the URL，there are some url can not open properly

        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;"></td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>The partition commit policy class for implement PartitionCommitPolicy interface. Only work in custom commit policy.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>sink.partition-commit.success-file.name</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;"></td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>The file name for success-file partition commit policy, default is '_SUCCESS'.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

You can extend the implementation of commit policy, The custom commit policy implementation like:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}

public class AnalysisCommitPolicy implements PartitionCommitPolicy {
    private HiveShell hiveShell;
	@Override
	public void commit(Context context) throws Exception {
	    if (hiveShell == null) {
	        hiveShell = createHiveShell(context.catalogName());
	    }
	    hiveShell.execute(String.format("ALTER TABLE %s ADD PARTITION (%s = '%s') location '%s'",
	        context.tableName(),
	        context.partitionKeys().get(0),
	        context.partitionValues().get(0),
	        context.partitionPath()));

> 		hiveShell.execute(String.format(

Reviewer: code ident

		    "ANALYZE TABLE %s PARTITION (%s = '%s') COMPUTE STATISTICS FOR COLUMNS",
		    context.tableName(),
		    context.partitionKeys().get(0),
		    context.partitionValues().get(0)));
	}
}

{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

## Full Example

The below shows how the file system connector can be used to write a streaming query to write data from Kafka into a file system and runs a batch query to read that data back out. 

{% highlight sql %}

CREATE TABLE kafka_table (
  user_id STRING,
  order_amount DOUBLE,
  log_ts TIMESTAMP(3),
  WATERMARK FOR log_ts AS log_ts - INTERVAL '5' SECOND
) WITH (...);

CREATE TABLE fs_table (
  user_id STRING,
  order_amount DOUBLE,
  dt STRING,
  hour STRING
) PARTITIONED BY (dt, hour) WITH (
  ’connector’=’filesystem’,

>   ’path’=’...’,

Reviewer: please use "'", not "‘"

Author: Good catch

---
title: "Hadoop FileSystem Connector"

> nav-title: Hadoop FileSystem

Author: It is for Flink FS, forgot to modify title.

  column_name1 INT,
  column_name2 STRING,
  ...
  part_name1 INT,
  part_name2 STRING
) PARTITIONED BY (part_name1, part_name2) WITH (
  'connector' = 'filesystem',           -- required: specify to connector type
  'path' = 'file:///path/to/whatever',  -- required: path to a directory
  'format' = '...',                     -- required: file system connector requires to specify a format,
                                        -- Please refer to Table Formats
                                        -- section for more details.s
  'partition.default-name' = '...',     -- optional: default partition name in case the dynamic partition
                                        -- column value is null/empty string.
  
  -- optional: the option to enable shuffle data by dynamic partition fields in sink phase, this can greatly
  -- reduce the number of file for filesystem sink but may lead data skew, the default value is disabled.
  'sink.shuffle-by-partition.enable' = '...',
  ...
)
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Make sure to include [Flink File System specific dependencies]({{ site.baseurl }}/internals/filesystems.html).

> <span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> File system sources for streaming are only experimental. In the future, we will support actual streaming use cases, i.e., partition and directory monitoring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> File system sources for streaming is still under development. In the future, the community will add support for common streaming use cases, i.e., partition and directory monitoring.
```

> ## Partition files

Reviewer 2: Lets be consistent in title capitalizaiton

```suggestion
## Partition Files
```

> The partition supported by the file system connector is similar to hive, but different from hive,
> hive manage partitions through catalog, file system table manages partitions according to the
> directory of the file system. File system connector discover and infer partitions automatically.
> For example, a table partitioned by datetime and hour is the structure in file system path:

Reviewer 2: I think I would find this confusing if I wasn't familiar with the FLIP, what about: 

```suggestion
Flink's file system partition support uses the standard hive format. However, it does not require partitions to be pre-registered with a table catalog. Partitions are discovered and inferred based on directory structure. For example, a table partitioned based on the directory below would be inferred to contain `datetime` and `hour` partitions.
```

```
path
└── datetime=2019-08-25
    └── hour=11
        ├── part-0.parquet
        ├── part-1.parquet
    └── hour=12
        ├── part-0.parquet
└── datetime=2019-08-26
    └── hour=6
        ├── part-0.parquet
```

> The file system table support partition inserting and overwrite inserting. See [INSERT Statement]({{ site.baseurl }}/table/sql/insert.html).
> 
> **NOTE:** When you insert overwrite to a partitioned table, only the corresponding partition will be overwrite, not the entire table.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this second sentence needs to be a note, its a natrual extension to a paragraph. 

```suggestion
The file system table supports both partition inserting and overwrite inserting. See [INSERT Statement]({{ site.baseurl }}/table/sql/insert.html). When you insert overwrite to a partitioned table, only the corresponding partition will be overwritten, not the entire table.
```

## File Formats

The file system connector supports multiple formats:

 - CSV: [RFC-4180](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4180). Uncompressed.

>  - JSON: Note JSON format for file system connector is not a typical JSON file. It is [Newline-delimited JSON](http://jsonlines.org/). Uncompressed.

Reviewer 2: ? 
```suggestion
 - JSON: Note JSON format for file system connector is not a typical JSON file but uncompressed [newline delimited JSON](http://jsonlines.org/).
```

 - Avro: [Apache Avro](http://avro.apache.org). Support compression by configuring `avro.codec`.
 - Parquet: [Apache Parquet](http://parquet.apache.org). Compatible with Hive.
 - Orc: [Apache Orc](http://orc.apache.org). Compatible with Hive.

> ## Streaming sink

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Streaming Sink
```

> The file system connector supports streaming sink, it uses [Streaming File Sink]({{ site.baseurl }}/connectors/streamfile_sink.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The file system connector supports streaming writes, based on Flink's [Streaming File Sink]({{ site.baseurl }}/connectors/streamfile_sink.html)
```

to write records to file. Row-encoded Formats are csv and json. Bulk-encoded Formats are parquet, orc and avro.

> ### Rolling policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Rolling Policy
```

each subtask of the sink that has received data for that partition. The in-progress part file will be closed and additional
part file will be created according to the configurable rolling policy. The policy rolls part files based on size,
a timeout that specifies the maximum duration for which a file can be open.

<table class="table table-bordered">
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 20%">Key</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 15%">Default</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 10%">Type</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 55%">Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>sink.rolling-policy.file-size</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">1024L * 1024L * 128L</td>
        <td>Long</td>
        <td>The maximum part file size before rolling.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>sink.rolling-policy.time-interval</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">30 m</td>
        <td>Duration</td>
        <td>The maximum time duration a part file can stay open before rolling (by default 30 min to avoid to many small files).</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

> **NOTE:** For bulk formats (parquet,orc,avro), the rolling policy in combination with the checkpoint interval(pending files

Reviewer 2: Avro is not a bulk format. 

```suggestion
**NOTE:** For bulk formats (parquet, orc), the rolling policy in combination with the checkpoint interval (pending files
```

Author: In https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-11395 , because in avro file writer, metadata kept in the header and the writer supports compression. So we implement it as a bulk writer.

become finished on the next checkpoint) control the size and number of these parts.

> **NOTE:** For row formats (csv,json), you can reduce the time interval appropriately to avoid too long delay.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** For row formats (csv, json, avro), you can reduce the time interval appropriately to avoid too long delay.
```

> ### Partition commit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Partition Commit
```

> Committing a partition is to notify the downstream application that the partition has finished writing, the partition is ready to be read.
> Streaming sink includes not only the writing of data files, but also the visibility commit of partition. When a partition completes
> writing, you need to notify metastore or add the success file in the directory. Partition commit mechanism allows you to:

Reviewer 2: I apologize but I rewrote this paragraph a bit more than normal. I hope that's alright. 
```suggestion
After writing a partition, it is often necessary to notify downstream applications. For example, add the partition to a Hive metastore or writing a `_SUCCESS` file in the directory. The file system sink contains a partition commit feature that allows configuring custom policies. Commit actions are based on a combination of `triggers` and `policies`. 
```

        <th class="text-left" style="width: 15%">Default</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 10%">Type</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 55%">Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>sink.partition-commit.trigger</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">partition-time</td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>Trigger type for partition commit: 'partition-time': extract time from partition, if 'watermark' > 'partition-time' + 'delay', will commit the partition. 'process-time': use processing time, if 'current processing time' > 'partition directory creation time' + 'delay', will commit the partition.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>sink.partition-commit.delay</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">0 s</td>
        <td>Duration</td>
        <td>The partition will not commit until the delay time. If it is a daily partition, should be '1 d', if it is a hourly partition, should be '1 h'.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

There are two types of trigger:
- The first is to judge the time of partition commit according to the partition time and watermark.

> This requires that your job has watermark, and the partition is divided according to time, such as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This requires that your job is using event time, and the partition is divided according to time, such as
```

hourly partition or daily partition.
- The second is partition processing time. The time of partition commit according to partition
creation time and current time. This trigger is more universal, but not so precise. For example,
data delay or failover will lead to premature partition commit.

> #### Partition time extractor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Partition Time Extractor
```

> Time extractor defines extracting time from partition values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Time extractors define extracting time from partition values.
```

  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>partition.time-extractor.kind</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">default</td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>Time extractor to extract time from partition values. Support default and custom. For default, can configure timestamp pattern. For custom, should configure extractor class.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>partition.time-extractor.class</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;"></td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>The extractor class for implement PartitionTimeExtractor interface.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>partition.time-extractor.timestamp-pattern</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;"></td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>The 'default' construction way allows users to use partition fields to get a legal timestamp pattern. Default support 'yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss' from first field. If timestamp in partition is single field 'dt', can configure: '$dt'. If timestamp in partition is year, month, day, hour, can configure: '$year-$month-$day $hour:00:00'. If timestamp in partition is dt and hour, can configure: '$dt $hour:00:00'.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

> The default extractor provide a timestamp pattern way, you can construct timestamp pattern from your partition fields.
> 
> You can also specify an implementation to complete partition time extraction. The custom extractor implementation like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default extractor is based on a timestamp pattern composed of your partition fields. You can also specify an implementation for fully custom partition extraction based on the `PartitionTimeExtractor` interface. 
```

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}

public class HourPartTimeExtractor implements PartitionTimeExtractor {
	@Override
    public LocalDateTime extract(List<String> keys, List<String> values) {
        String dt = values.get(0);
        String hour = values.get(1);
		return Timestamp.valueOf(dt + " " + hour + ":00:00").toLocalDateTime();
	}
}

{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

> #### Partition commit policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Partition Commit Policy
```

> The partiton commit policy defines how to commit a partition. Two policies are supported by default:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The partition commit policy defines what action is taken when partitions are committed. 
```

- The first is metastore, but since the file system does not have metastore, it is an empty implementation.

> - The second is the success file, which will write an empty file in the directory corresponding to the partition.

Reviewer 2: @JingsongLi @KurtYoung 

The naming of these options is not good. Metastore having a default no-op implementation does not make any sense. There should be `none`, `success-file`, and `custom`. I want to very strongly encourage making this change for 1.11.

Author: We can hide(throws exception?) it for filesystem connector.
But for Hive table, `metastore` is needed.

Reviewer 3: Throwing exception in filesystem connector would be better, and we also need to highlight this in document.

Author: Created JIRA: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-17925

        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;"></td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>The file name for success-file partition commit policy, default is '_SUCCESS'.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

You can extend the implementation of commit policy, The custom commit policy implementation like:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}

public class AnalysisCommitPolicy implements PartitionCommitPolicy {
    private HiveShell hiveShell;
	@Override
	public void commit(Context context) throws Exception {
	    if (hiveShell == null) {
	        hiveShell = createHiveShell(context.catalogName());
	    }
	    hiveShell.execute(String.format("ALTER TABLE %s ADD PARTITION (%s = '%s') location '%s'",
	        context.tableName(),
	        context.partitionKeys().get(0),
	        context.partitionValues().get(0),
	        context.partitionPath()));
		hiveShell.execute(String.format(
		    "ANALYZE TABLE %s PARTITION (%s = '%s') COMPUTE STATISTICS FOR COLUMNS",
		    context.tableName(),
		    context.partitionKeys().get(0),
		    context.partitionValues().get(0)));
	}
}

{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

> ## Example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Full Example
```

> Here is a example to:
> 
> - streaming sql: kafka table -> filesystem table.
> - batch sql: query filesystem table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The below shows how the file system connector can be used to write a streaming query to write data from Kafka into a file system and runs a batch query to read that data back out. 
```

## File Formats

The file system connector supports multiple formats:

 - CSV: [RFC-4180](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4180). Uncompressed.
 - JSON: Note JSON format for file system connector is not a typical JSON file but uncompressed [newline delimited JSON](http://jsonlines.org/).
 - Avro: [Apache Avro](http://avro.apache.org). Support compression by configuring `avro.codec`.
 - Parquet: [Apache Parquet](http://parquet.apache.org). Compatible with Hive.
 - Orc: [Apache Orc](http://orc.apache.org). Compatible with Hive.

## Streaming Sink

The file system connector supports streaming writes, based on Flink's [Streaming File Sink]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/connectors/streamfile_sink.html)
to write records to file. Row-encoded Formats are csv and json. Bulk-encoded Formats are parquet, orc and avro.

### Rolling Policy

Data within the partition directories are split into part files. Each partition will contain at least one part file for
each subtask of the sink that has received data for that partition. The in-progress part file will be closed and additional
part file will be created according to the configurable rolling policy. The policy rolls part files based on size,

> a timeout that specifies the maximum duration for which a file can be open.

Reviewer 4: So user can roll a part file either by size or by time, or both?

Author: yes

<table class="table table-bordered">
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 20%">Key</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 15%">Default</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 10%">Type</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 55%">Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>sink.rolling-policy.file-size</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">128MB</td>

>         <td>MemorySize</td>

Reviewer 4: Why is this called memory size? And what's the difference between memory size and the file size that a user can see in the file system?

Author: I think it is a legacy reason, and it is used in disk too.

        <td>The maximum part file size before rolling.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>sink.rolling-policy.time-interval</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">30 m</td>
        <td>Duration</td>
        <td>The maximum time duration a part file can stay open before rolling (by default 30 min to avoid to many small files).</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

> **NOTE:** For bulk formats (parquet, orc, avro), the rolling policy in combination with the checkpoint interval(pending files

Reviewer 4: Does this mean only bulk formats can work with checkpoints?

Author: No, it means checkpoint must trigger rolling for bulk formats, but not for row-based.

generation. The trigger of partition commit according to partition creation time and current system time. This trigger
is more universal, but not so precise. For example, data delay or failover will lead to premature partition commit.
- The second is the trigger of partition commit according to the time that extracted from partition values and watermark.
This requires that your job has watermark generation, and the partition is divided according to time, such as
hourly partition or daily partition.

If you want to let downstream see the partition as soon as possible, no matter whether its data is complete or not:
- 'sink.partition-commit.trigger'='process-time' (Default value)
- 'sink.partition-commit.delay'='0s' (Default value)
Once there is data in the partition, it will immediately commit. Note: the partition may be committed multiple times.

If you want to let downstream see the partition only when its data is complete, and your job has watermark generation, and you can extract the time from partition values:
- 'sink.partition-commit.trigger'='partition-time'
- 'sink.partition-commit.delay'='1h' ('1h' if your partition is hourly partition, depends on your partition type)

> This is the most accurate way to commit partition, and it will try to ensure that the committed partitions are as data complete as possible.

Reviewer 4: What happens if late data arrives after a partition is committed? Is it appended to the partition or discarded?

Reviewer 4: I just saw the earlier discussions about this question. I guess we should also mention it in the doc.

#### Partition Time Extractor

Time extractors define extracting time from partition values.

<table class="table table-bordered">
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 20%">Key</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 15%">Default</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 10%">Type</th>
        <th class="text-left" style="width: 55%">Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>partition.time-extractor.kind</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">default</td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>Time extractor to extract time from partition values. Support default and custom. For default, can configure timestamp pattern. For custom, should configure extractor class.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>partition.time-extractor.class</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">(none)</td>
        <td>String</td>
        <td>The extractor class for implement PartitionTimeExtractor interface.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><h5>partition.time-extractor.timestamp-pattern</h5></td>
        <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">(none)</td>
        <td>String</td>

>         <td>The 'default' construction way allows users to use partition fields to get a legal timestamp pattern. Default support 'yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss' from first field. If timestamp in partition is single field 'dt', can configure: '$dt'. If timestamp in partition is year, month, day, hour, can configure: '$year-$month-$day $hour:00:00'. If timestamp in partition is dt and hour, can configure: '$dt $hour:00:00'.</td>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        <td>The 'default' construction way allows users to use partition fields to get a legal timestamp pattern. Default support 'yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss' from first field. If timestamp should be extracted from a single partition field 'dt', can configure: '$dt'. If timestamp should be extracted from multiple partition fields, say 'year', 'month', 'day' and 'hour', can configure: '$year-$month-$day $hour:00:00'. If timestamp should be extracted from two partition fields 'dt' and 'hour', can configure: '$dt $hour:00:00'.</td>
```
